1 Some time ago, after you left your home and family and, with great desire had traveled to the furthest reaches of the great sea, because of its greater power, you nevertheless remembered the wilderness. When you had first entered into that wilderness, you were a mere recruit, but you had a leader guiding your path. He then became the commander of a company of spiritual soldiers. Although you had left your parents, you were still following a kinsman when you followed him. But when you thought to follow him when he reached the high rank of archbishop, love carried you back to the friendly solitude of the wilderness. Consequently, you are now on a nobler and greater path. When you first sought out the desert, you appeared as a member of his company. Now, when you have sought out the desert once again, you have given up that brother. And what sort of person and how great is he? Always so attentive in his loving care for you! How devoted he is to you, with such singular affection! So that you could prefer nothing to his love, except perhaps the love of the wilderness alone. When, after careful weighing of these things, you preferred this love, you demonstrated not that you love him too little, but this wilderness somewhat more. You demonstrated how great in you was that love of solitude to which even the greatest might yield. What, then, is this love of the wilderness that is within you called, unless it be the love of God? You have followed the appointed order of the law of love. First love thy God, then thy neighbor. 2. Whom, nevertheless, only in anticipation of your success, as I conceive in my heart, and not, I think, opposing your departure or design, but in a strange manner among persons devoted to one another, he (whom I judge wishes no less than you to depart) dismissed you. For he in turn also greatly esteems you. Nevertheless, in 61 love of you he seeks your advantage; inasmuch as his love is profoundest and highest toward you, the pinnacle of that love always tends to service. 3. You have already distributed all your fortune in order to be rich only in Christ. You possess the virtue of an old man with youth of years. One finds in you both spirit and eloquence; still I should have admired and prized nothing in you more in the first place than the seat of solitude you desired; whence because you often request me to answer you copiously with most lengthy and articulate letters, it is necessary that, when you would be wise, you endure my foolishness for a little bit, while I cultivate the manifold grace of the Lord toward this very same wilderness you prize. Therefore I should properly call the wilderness the boundless temple of our God; indeed, whoever has resolved to dwell in silence believes he is to rejoice in private. Frequently, seeing them there, He preserved His saints, and by arranging encounters in the place, He is not contemptuous of humanity; in fact, being glorified, Moses saw the glorious face of God in the desert;49 trembling in the desert, Elijah, lest he should see God, hid his face;50 and however often He Himself might return to all his property, and although never being absent anywhere, nevertheless, as one may believe, He is worthy, secretly restricting his appearances to the wilderness and the sky. 4. A certain man, being asked by another why he believed God to be in that place, responded by saying that wherever he should lead him, he should diligently follow. Then following Him to the same place, having become widely separated by the open spaces of the wilderness, and withdrawn to the enormous solitude: "God" he said "is there!" And it is not unwarranted there to be more quickly believed where more easily He is discovered. 49 Exod. III 50 III Reg. XIX, 13 = I Kings 19:13 62 5. For also, in the beginning, when God made all things wisely and particularly, and he determined what their appropriate uses would be, He at least did not abandon this part of the earth as useless and dishonored. For the whole creation is not greater in its present magnificence than the wilderness, that, as I judge, creating in foreknowledge, He prepared for the saints who were to come. I believe that the one being bountiful in fruitfulness, He wished this other one to have a proportionately more favorable character to yield fertility of saints, so that in this way the territories of the desert should prosper and, whenever He brought water down from the "higher of its mountains," they should overflow also, being enclosed by an abundance of fruit. And He made good the lack of these places when He enriched the sterile habitation as an inhabitant. 6. That possessor of paradise and transgressor of the command, when he might have had the place of luxury, was unable to keep the commandment given him by God. Indeed, by as much as that place was more pleasant, by so much that man was more inclined to ruin. Whence He placed him not only under His laws, but death provided that torment all the way down to us. In the same way He cultivated the wilderness with the life He desired. Hence in pleasantness the inhabitant of paradise prepared death. But lately, we may come to God in the wilderness. 7. When Moses had led his flock to the innermost part of the desert, at a distance he saw God in the guise of a glowing fire that did not burn. Nor did he only see; truly he even heard Him speak.51 After He had warned him to take off his shoes, the Lord clearly proclaimed the wilderness to be sacred, when He said "the place on which you stand is sacred ground."52 By this sign He clearly revealed the hidden glory of the place. Indeed, the sanctity of the place is confirmed by God by the 51 Exod. III, 1-3 52 Exod. III, 5 63 inviolability of His testimony, in which, as I believe, He also suggests equally and implicitly that whoever would enter the wilderness of pristine concerns, must proceed after dissolving his previous obligations of life‘s cares, and, so as not to pollute the place, advance, unimpeded by those former bonds. There Moses was first employed as an intimate intermediary of divine conversation; he heard the words and in turn responded. He both inquired and in similar manner was taught what things are to be said and what things are to be done, in mutual conversation, and he conversed with the Lord of Heaven in common speech. There he took up again his staff, mighty in the making of miracles. Entering the wilderness as a shepherd of sheep, he returned from the wilderness as a shepherd of peoples. 8. How would the people of God be liberated from Egypt and be freed from earthly labors if they had not sought the untrodden way and fled to solitude, 53 approaching in the wilderness that God by whom they had been rescued from servitude? Therefore they made their way to a desert of vast and terrible extent, Moses leading. "How great are the multitude of your gifts Lord!"54 Entering the wilderness, Moses saw God; he returned that he might see Him again. Plainly being the leader of the journey, the Lord Himself led his people toward the desert, whether traveling by night or by day, by drawing a column now of reddening flame, then of shining cloud. Thus He gave the deserving a sign out of heaven which He illuminated so that its great length gleamed alternately milky white, or with flames. Guided from afar by this light, Israel followed the reddening light made by the falling fire, because while heading into the solitude of the wilderness, it was appropriate for the Lord, when He would reveal the way, to go before them with a light. 53 Exod. XIV 54 Psa. 31:19 (English). 64 9. But was it not repeatedly made evident by these people, encamped in the desert, being shut in near the impassable sea, when choosing the dusty pathway? Carrying their surging masses away from the red shore between the parted waters,55 the route led between the steep whirlpools. And in this way, viewing in awe the threat of the suspended mountainous mass of the walls of water from the deep valley between, the guardian of the clan crossed the waters of the strait. 10. Neither did the power of the divine works stop with this great thing; for because they continued their journey, the sea, after having been made bare by the operation of the backward rushing waters, returning to its accustomed places, destroyed the road with their enemies. I believe, lest Israel would have returned from the wilderness, He closed the road. He opened a highway between the waters and then He engulfed it with swirling waters. After having laid bare the way to the desert for those fleeing, He closed it.56 11. Therefore that people was granted this courage by grace when they were going toward solitude; nevertheless, He promised more great things when they should inhabit it. For indeed, the Lord renewed them by an unexpected miracle when from a smitten rock, He supplied overflowing waters for the thirsty and fearful by drawing forth from the arid rocks hidden brooks from a living spring. With an invisible hand He imposed an unexpected nature on the hidden veins.57 And not only there did He flood the bowels of dry rock, for truly He even prevented the drawing of bitter waters by superimposing sweetness over bitterness. Those waters He called forth, these He transformed; yet bringing forth waters from the rocks was not a greater miracle than bringing forth waters from other waters. The people were 55 Exod. XIV, 22 56 Exod. XIV, 27 57 Exod. XVII, 6 65 stupefied there by the whole heavenly aid, perceiving powerfully in those waters not less whom they were, than in these whom they had not yet become. 12. There also, when the Lord showered down bread from the clouds like a dry rain, the people gathered the food that lay whitened on the ground. Drifting like snow, Manna fell on the tents and surroundings of the encampments,58 where "man ate the bread of angels." And because "sufficient for the day is its own evil"59 sometimes the divine loving-kindness brought sustenance daily, and at other times for collection in advance, lest Israel might consider the morrow. And so, at various times He ministers heavenly sustenance to those established in the wilderness because they cannot find earthly. 13. Being now an inhabitant of the wilderness, did not this same Hebrew people receive the Law and heavenly edicts, since being brought nearer it was worthy of seeing the words inscribed on the tables by the Divine hand?60 Led from the encampment toward the meeting with the Lord, they took up a position near the base of the mountain. Stricken with fear, they watched in terror as the visible majesty settled upon that peak of Sinai. Astonished, they beheld from afar the smoking mountain, with fire flowing between, which was then completely covered by the densest cloud, so that it was completely covered. Thereupon they grew very frightened, their trembling being made violent by the distinct flashes of lightening and the numerous peals of thunder mixed with the resounding clamor of trumpets. So the sons of Israel, now being in solitude, were worthy of seeing the throne of God and hearing His voice. 58 Exod. XVI, 14 59 Matt. VI, XXXIV. Vulgate has sua, with M, Q(theta), and c has the variant sibi ipsi 60 Exod. XX 66 14. Then this multitude of people was nourished and sustained by such and similar miracles when they were foreign residents of the desert, and when He nurtured them with uncommon food, unexpected drink and imperishable clothing, when even those things which clothe the outer body endured in an imperishable state. Whatever of their necessity the nature of the places did not provide, the visible splendor of God bestowed. Scarcely does one saint attain to these heavenly gifts of grace which, concerning this people it is said, ―the Lord did not deal in such a manner with all nations.61 He bestowed special things, He granted things unheard of, when by divine benefactions He nourished the people in the wilderness. 15. And these acts, if you please, might be handed down as a figure of us, and that appearance should show forth in the hidden mysteries of the thing, and everything in Moses' baptism,62 in the cloud and in the sea, should be referred to as spiritual food to eat, spiritual drink to imbibe;63 yet all these things, in this way, maintain the faith as they would preserve the truth. Yet the praise of the wilderness in this way is indeed not less, especially if the things which were being conveyed there in the height should have reference to the sacraments. Nothing of grace was diminished, (especially if that condition of body and clothes was not then coming to corruption) when they brought down the token of the coming life. For great is the Grace of the place. If the peace of that most blessed age had such as him, the wilderness should soon have such a one in your age. 16. What? Who among the Children of Israel entered that desirable land except by passing through the habitation of the wilderness? And how would the 61 Ps. CXLVII, 20 62 I Cor. X, 1-4 63 I Cor. X, 2 67 same people afterward have possessed that land flowing with milk and honey64 before they had occupied this arid and barren land? Always, the entire journey to the true fatherland is itself thrown open after a stay in the wilderness. He who wishes "to see the goodness of the lord in the land of the living"65 must occupy the uninhabitable land; he who would strive to be a citizen of that land must be a resident of this. 64 Iosue V, 6 65 Ps XXVI,13 68 17. But foregoing further consideration of Israel, David himself, who did not lay an ambush for the hostile king,66 yet while seeking the desert, escaped, while he remained in the Idumaean dryness, was thirsting for the whole heart of the Lord, as one thirsting in a desert both trackless and waterless. Then at last God appeared to the saint, and successively he saw alike both the moral excellence and the holy glory of God. 18. Truly, Elijah, a most unusual husbandman, closed the sky against showers,67 reserved the king’s soldiers for the fires,68 received nourishment from a bird,69 revoked the fixed laws of death,70 crossed the broken stream of the divided Jordan,71 and ascended into heaven, being carried away in a flaming chariot.72 66 I Reg. XXIII 67 III Reg. XVII, 1 68 IV Reg. I, 10 69 Cf. III Reg. XVII, 4-6 70 III Reg. XVII, 21-22 71 III Reg. XVII, 15 72 IV Reg. II, 11 69 19. Thereafter, what of Elisha, the zealous imitator of his life and moral excellence? Did he not make that much clear by similar work of divine miracles, now by the torrents of water being split,73 now by iron floating,74 now by the revival 75 of a dead boy, now by the increase of olive oil the poor family made?76 And finally, as like the other as possible, did this not also confirm in him the moral excellence of the master,77 that the course which that witness having performed, this one having performed, now arouses us to performing?78 20. The sons of the prophets also, abandoning the cities, long for the flowing Jordan, with the twin source, and set up tents in hidden places, being united by the distant torrent. The sacred throng was keeping watch from the solitude of the river banks, as a scattering of refugees for tents and fitting habitations: The singular disposition was that contemplating the paternal spirit.79 21. What? Did not that one, (than whom, of those born of women, a greater has not arisen)80 ―crying in the desert‖ not live in the desert? In the desert baptism was handed down by him; in the desert repentance was proclaimed; in the desert the first mention of the heavenly reign was occasioned; there he first carried these things to public hearing, where everyone seeking them quickly acquired these things. Not 73 IV Reg. II, 13-14 74 IV Reg. VI, 5-6 75 IV Reg. IV, 34-35 76 IV Reg. IV, 2-4 77 IV Reg. II, 9-14 78 IV Reg. II, 4, 6 79 IV Reg. VI, 1-4 80 Matt. XI, 11 70 being undeserving, this upright denizen of the desert was sent as a messenger before the face of the Lord, and disclosed the way into the heavenly kingdom; being worthy both as the precursor and as the witness of Christ, he heard the Father speaking from heaven, attained to baptizing the Son, and saw the Holy Spirit descending. 22. And our Lord and Savior, after being baptized, as the scripture says,81 was quickly led into the desert by the Spirit. Who, then, is this Spirit? Without a doubt He indwells the sanctified. Whom the Holy Spirit draws forth into the desert He doubtless commends and secretly inspires. And with the provision of the Holy Spirit the wilderness becomes a worthy suggestion. Therefore, administering the mysterious rite of (baptism in) living water is nothing in itself before the One leading cleanses, in as much as He draws toward solitude. And notwithstanding He had always sanctified the sacred waters, the mere cleansing [of water baptism] had not rinsed away the sin of mankind. For He neither caused nor altered transgression. Yet the architect of the example was inflamed with the passion of the wilderness and he desired what to Him was in everything salutary, but to us is unworthy. If what is dedicated to God is free from blemish, how much more greatly is what is necessary to man laden with guilt? If our prayers are not lacking, how much more greatly are our longings sinful? 23. Yet there, in the service of the Lord, by being removed from the disturbances of the surrounding din, they succeed to the secret ministries of the divine powers. And being established in the wilderness, being brought back, so to speak, into heaven, he is, by those occurrences, received by the sustaining angels.82 There, He confuted that enemy of ancient times tempting to the cunning ambush of signs; the one who defeated the old Adam the new Adam rejected.. Oh great praise of the 81 Matt. IV, 1 82 Matt IV. 11 71 desert, because the Devil, who had been victorious in paradise, was vanquished in the wilderness. 24. The desert was also that place in which our savior, with five loaves and two ordinary sized fish, fed, satisfied, and filled five thousand men.83 It is always in the desert that Jesus feeds His people with bread; in time past the manna of divine favor had displayed the faith, now the fragments proclaimed it, and by the same miracle of sustenance; as then it descended to the hungry, so now it increased to the filled; by His gift, the feasts of the founder were greater than the food which had been brought by the guests. To the desert, I say, now at last to the desert we impute the causes of such great signs. Can moral excellence exhibit power if the region should possess an abundance? 83 Matt. XIV 72 25. And then the Lord Jesus withdrew to the greater remoteness of a high mountain, with only the three chosen ones being called to Him, and His countenance shown with an unusual brightness; when He might have preferred to be accepted publicly by mankind, He instead entrusted the disclosure of His majesty to manifestations in solitude. There, then, that greatest of the apostles said "it is good for us to be here,"84 26. Also, this same Lord Jesus, as it is written, went into a desert place and there He prayed. Therefore that place now is called the place of prayer, which God the author has both shown and taught to be suitable for prevailing upon God, whence prayer might more easily penetrate the veil of its own humility, being aided in that place because being honored for separation. And He Himself, by praying in that place when He petitioned God, demonstrated where He happened to wish us to pray. 27. Well now, what about John, and the memorable Macarius,85 and so many others, whose conversation, while in the desert, was made in heaven? They approached as closely to the Lord as to that place; as closely as the divine law permitted a man to approach God; and were urged on to the labors of divine matters so far as it was allowed for things surrounded by the flesh to be permitted. In solitary places they engrafted the heavenly frame of mind fixed on supernatural things; hence they engrafted the accompanying grace either for revelations concealed or for signs proclaimed, and while approving of the solitude at every point they were being drawn forward all the way into this state of affairs, in order that, while perhaps touching the earth with the body, truly they should already 84 Matt XVII:4, Mark IX: 5 85 St. Macarius (ca. 300 — ca. 390). Known also as Macarius the Citizen and Macarius the Elder, he was born in upper Egypt and at about the age of thirty, he joined a colony of monks in the desert of Scete, which was then the center of Egyptian monasticism. Known for his piety and miracles, he was ordained a priest in about 340. 73 possess heaven with the spirit. 28. Not without warrant, therefore, I proclaim the dwelling place of this wasteland a certain seat of faith, an ark of virtue, a sanctuary of charity, a treasury of piety, a reservoir of justice. For just as in a mansion the precious things are deposited in a separate place, being concealed in an enclosure, so also that splendor of saints is concealed by the wilderness, which nature preserves with its own barriers. And it is consigned to a certain conclave of the desert, lest by the usage of human contact it should be cheapened. And this palatial ornament of the more precious wealth in that worldly house is not only fittingly hidden from the world by the Lord; just as truly, when being used, it is brought forth from concealment. 29. The solicitude of the divine Providence regarding the wilderness had been highest and greatest in times past, but at present it certainly is not small. For even now the unexpected manner of life divinely comes with an abundance upon the inhabitants of the wilderness. How else than by a descent from heaven, does it flow? They also have such a heavenly plenty in this manna of theirs, and not any less to these does the Lord spread nourishment from concealment by the work of His strong arm. And when, at length, responding to the divine office, by piercing through the stones, the waters flow from the rock, how else than just as being struck a blow with the rod of Moses are they brought forth from stone? Similar are the conditions of the garments in the wastes of the wilderness; nor does He now abandon. Until in such circumstances one freely follows the divine provisions, He certainly waits to be followed. The Lord sustained His own in the desert for a certain time, but now also sustains; and those indeed for only forty years, but these for however many years they will be there. 30. The saint, being inflamed with the divine fire, rightly chooses this home, having abandoned his own home. He rightly prefers neighbors, sons, and parents, and by commerce purchases everything of his own. By deserting the fruitful 74 fatherland, he rightly obtains the fame of a temporary fatherland, from which neither fear, nor desire, nor joy, nor sorrow may summon him. Plainly, this alone rightly should be the prize of the whole disposition. 31. Indeed, who is able accurately to relate the benefits of the wilderness and the full weight of the virtues of those living in it? Being placed in this world, in a certain manner they retire from the world, "in solitude" as the Apostle says "wandering in mountains, and in caves and in the caverns of the earth."86 Not unjustly the Apostle denies that the world is worthy of such as these, who are of another disposition than that tumult of common humanity, being the silent ones of reserve and rest, and not more from being away from the inclination to sin than from the opportunity. 32. The illustrious men among the elders of that generation, being fatigued (weary) by the exertions of their occupations, withdrew into their philosophy, as if into their home. By so much greater excellence do they turn aside to this study of the most manifest wisdom, and more nobly do they withdraw to the freedom of isolation and to the solitude of the deserts, so that, being to such a degree void of philosophy, they are kept busy in the agorae of that wilderness and in their own gymnasia as it were. Where, I ask, might the Passover have been observed more freely than in the habitation of the desert? But among the virtues is also continence: Continence, I emphasize, which is, as it were, the wilderness of the heart. For even Moses continued forty days in the wilderness,87 and after him that prophet Elijah gave the same number of days to a fast,88 and each of them, strained beyond the strength of human accomplishment; then the Lord also did the same thing, but he went out into 86 Heb. XI, 38 87 Exod. XXIV, 18 88 III Reg. XIX, 8 75 the desert for a time of abstinence.89 Nor beyond this period did we observe fasting for the exact same interval anywhere, yet as anyone might concede, I also allotted authority to the Lord for that period. 89 Matt. IV, 2 33. Where, I ask, will one happen to find, that the Lord might be any more greatly or sweetly unoccupied? Where will one find the road leading to perfection unfolding more quickly? Where will one find a larger field for moral excellence being made accessible? Where (if it were possible to look around) is the discipline of the mind easier? Where more free the heart than where it might contend to cling to God, pressing forth, to those remote places, as it were, into which it was brought not only to discover, but truly to attend upon God? 76 34. And exceedingly frequently in the wilderness, the fine sand appears; nevertheless nowhere are the foundations of that evangelical house more firmly established 90 . Granted that someone may wish to stand firm on those sands, however, by no means did He build The House on the sands. That edifice, as predicted, is erected nowhere more greatly than there upon the rock which, made firm by an immovable stability, will endure unshaken by siege engine, as at the time of the rushing tempests, neither blown away by the winds nor undermined by the smashing torrents. Accordingly, the inhabitants of the desert build such edifices for themselves, but in their hearts! Being heedless of height, in humility they seek the exalted. The exalted continually follow after with humility, as the indolent, unmindful of the earth, on account of heavenly hope and devotion, who cast off wealth as long as they prefer to be poor; they hasten not to be poor as long as they yearn to be wealthy; by day and by night, by labor and by vigilance they contend, as they lay hold of the principle of that life of which there is no end. Thus the wilderness, like the maternal breast, most suitably accommodates those covetous of eternity, and well accommodates those prodigal of brevity, those careless of the present time, those certain of the future; and through these things they will comprehend that, in whatever things they persevered to the ends of the ages, by these things they were touching the ages without end. 90 Matt. VII, 24 35. There burn the wholesome laws written on the inner man and the more subtle ordinances of the eternal ages. There men of reproach and precepts of villainy do not reflect His nature, nor do the avenging ordinances of capital offenses extend there. The laws regard the heart, if not most pure of unworthy things, then the culprit; and besides, the inner motion of the mind itself is restrained for all devotion within the limits of justice. And by the same one Himself, indeed, by the Judge of the light burden, the principles of reflection are interwoven. Whereas with others it 77 be bad to have done evil, truly, with Him, it is evil not to have done good. 36. But by what means might I be able to venerate the principles of the wilderness by recalling internal merits? Truly, I cannot now pass over in silence that which, among the inhabitants of that place, is that power of moral excellence, the whole thing being nearly equally revealed as concealed. For when, at any rate, in the remote places they separate themselves from the world, and refusing human companionship they truly and passionately wish to be concealed, nevertheless, they are not able to conceal their merit; as much as the life of these people moves itself inwardly, so much does the glory of God hurry itself abroad. Thus, as I judge, within whatever constraints the inhabitant of His wilderness might remain unknown for a generation, yet he might not remain unknown as an example. This is the lamp that, being placed on the candelabrum of the wilderness, shines throughout the entire world. This most brilliant light diffuses itself throughout the dark parts of the world. This is the city that, being constructed on the mountain, cannot be hidden in the desert, that in its likeness gave the heavenly Jerusalem to the lands. If anyone is likewise in darkness, let him draw near to this light, so he might see. If anyone is subject to danger, let him come to this city, that he may be secure. 37. Oh how pleasant to the ones still thirsting after God are the unfrequented places of those pasture lands of solitude! How lovely to the ones seeking Christ are those secret places, who by nature being watchful, are scattered far and wide! All things are quiet: then by certain stimuli produced by the silence, one's joyful mind is awakened unto God, and quickened by the unutterable loss of self possession, no sound making a disturbance within that place (the voice being nothing if not strong with God) and that only within the spirit, while the crashing silence of the secret outpost interrupts and changes that condition of that gentle rest, the din by a sweeter quiet, and the sacred tumult by the gentlest conversation. Then the heights 78 themselves, boiling over with harmony 91 proceed with pleasant resounding hymns, and they are received in heaven no less,92 I may say, with shouts than with prayers. 38. The encompassing adversary,93 then, snarls in vain, like a wolf at the sheepfold enclosing the sheep, and similarly against the holy offices, from the periphery of the wilderness. He drives away his enemies and, not in vain are they vigilant who guard the city; the private property of Christ the Champion is protected, in order that God‘s adopted people might be shut off from their enemies only so far as they might be exposed to the solitary spaces. The chorus of rejoicing angels soberly visits the splendid spaces of the desert, and passing to and fro by means of Jacob's ladder, the multitude of the secret visitation illuminate the wilderness.94 There also the bridegroom reclines at midday, and the inhabitants of the desert marvel at Him of the grievous wound, saying: "We found whom our soul sought; we will hold Him fast and not let Him wander away."95 91 Ps. 113, 4 92 Luc. XV, 7 93 Cf. Job I, 6 94 Gen. XXVIII, 12 95 Cant. III, 4. It appears that the Text of Patrologia Latina has been emended to correspond to the Vulgate vocabulary. See textual notes at Latin text. 79 39. And it is not unfruitful, as it is often believed, nor is such a land as the wilderness sterile nor again are the dry rocks of the desert barren. There, even the manifold native shoot returns a hundredfold of the fruit. There the seeds scattered near the road do not easily find depth of soil, which seeds the birds take. And they do not spread easily in rocky land, which not having depth of earth they become hot and dry when first they come up. And they do not easily escape among thorn hedges, which now being grown are overwhelmed by the thorns. There the husbandman reaps a harvest with an increase.96 Among these stones that crop is brought forth through which even the bones grow fat. Likewise, there, the living bread which descends from the sky97 is found; among those rocks burst forth the fountains of irrigation and the living waters, which are not only satisfying but are truly able to suffice even for salvation. There is an extraordinarily pleasant agreement between this meadowland and pleasure of the inner man, on the one hand, and this uncultivated desert, on the other; that which is wilderness for the body, is the paradise for the soul. 40. Now the fruitful region of the land itself has little of which to boast by comparison to the wilderness. Is a land enriched to some degree by its fruits? In this land that grain is most highly begotten which by its fat satisfies the hungry. Is another being filled by rejoicing vineyards? In this land that wine is most joyously brought forth which well makes glad the heart of man. 98 Is another preeminent for pastures? In this land graze those sheep concerning which it is proclaimed feed my sheep. 99 Is another pictured with flourishing flowers? In this land truly shines that 96 Cf. Matt. XIII, 4-8; Marc IV, 4-8; Luc. VIII, 5-8. 97 Cf. Ioh. VI, 33 and 59. 98 PsG CIII, 15 99 Ioan. XXI, 17 80 flower of the field and lily of the valley. 100 Lastly, is another exulting for the beautiful metals, is another yellow for all its gold? In this land the variegated stonework sparkles with the shimmering light of lightning. Thus, in every way, this land is superior to all others, and by far excels all lands for the good of all others. 100 Cant. II, 1 41. Therefore, oh venerable land, either habitable by the saints already placed within you, or desirable to those not far removed from you, do you exist, because by Him you are made fertile for the good of the whole world, wherein the world is held together. You seek that husbandman who cultivates His own land, not yours; being sterile of the faults of your inhabitants, you are fertile with virtues. Whosoever of the saints sought your friendship found God; whoever nurtured you found Christ in you. Whoever himself inhabits you delights in the indwelling Lord. And the same is both your possessor and a divine possession. He who does not flee your habitation, himself becomes a temple of God. 81 42. Indeed, I owe reverence to all the places of the wilderness which are illuminated by the withdrawal of the pious; nevertheless with special honor I embrace my Lirinum, which from the extensive shipwrecks of the tempestuous world, by the arms of the most pious rescues those coming from that world, and the ones of this generation burning with agitation it brings gently under its shadows, in order that, panting, they there may regain the spirit beneath that inner shadow of the Lord. By flowing waters, flourishing grasses, shining flowers, by pleasant sights and by aromas, by those possessing paradise it displays what they shall possess. Which was founded under the authority of Honoratus, author of heavenly instructions; which so quickly received the Father by so many rules, its countenance shines with the force of the apostolic spirit; which both nourishes the most excellent monks and produces the surrounding priests. This place now keeps the successor of that one, Maximus101 by name, because after the brilliant one himself, he deserves to be received; this place cherished Lupus,102 reverencing the name, who brought back to us that wolf of the tribe of Benjamin; this place cherished the brother of that Vincentium,103 the clear jewel of inner brilliance; that place now possesses the venerable grave of Caprasium, an equal to the saints of old. This place now cherishes those saintly old men who, from their separate cells, introduced the Egyptian Fathers to our Gauls. 43. Whom did I see there but my good Jesus, the assembly of the saints, and 101 St. Maximus, Bishop of Turin (ca. 380 -- ca. 470). Despite the fact that many of his writings survive, little is known of Maximus beyond the facts that he witnessed the martyrdoms of three missionaries, and attended synods in Milan (451) and Rome (465). 102 St. Lupus, Bishop of Troyes (ca. 383 -- 479). Having agreed with his wife, after seven years of marriage, to separate and devote themselves to religious matters, he made his way to Lérins, where, in 426 he embraced the monastic life. about a year later, however, he accepted the bishopric of Troyes, which position he held for about fifty years. 103 St. Vincent of Lérins (died before 450). Beyond the fact that he was a monk at the abbey of Lérins, little is known about his life. His work the Commonitorium, contains the famous Vincentian Canon of Orthodoxy: "Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est." (What has been believed everywhere, always, and by all). 82 the covenanters? They burned a great value in those boxes of delightful unguent, which breathed the aroma of life everywhere. I inferred the inner man by the condition of the outer man they presented; by the value of being bound together, by the downcast humility, by the most tender piety, by the greatest steadfastness in hope, by the modest walk, by the quick obedience, by the silent camaraderie, by the serene countenance. Truly they themselves, by the contemplation of the angelic, continuously manifest the walk of the quiet life. They covet nothing, they desire nothing, except that which alone desiring, they covet. While they seek a blessed life, they move with the blessed, and even while they so far encompass this, still they pursue. And do they thus desire to be separated from transgressions? Now they are separated. Do they wish to have a pure life? Now they have it. Do they strive to mark all time in the praises of God? They so mark. Do they desire to rejoice in the company of the saints? They rejoice. Do they seek to be delighted with Christ? They delight in the spirit. Do they eagerly long to obtain the life of the wilderness? They obtain by the heart. Thus, through the most abundant grace of Christ, many of these things which are longed for in the future, are awarded in the present. They take further the thing itself, yet they follow the hope. They do not have an inconsiderable thing, and even the value of the labor is in the labor itself. Because, I may say, the reward will be what is now in the exertion. 44. By these things, my dearest Hilary, the community was most deeply imparted and instilled in you, and also most deeply in those you gathered together, who are now cheered with eager exultation at your return. With these I implore you, do not remove my sins from your memory or from your intercession; with these, I say, in whom I do not know whether you yourself had brought more joy, or whether you had found more. You now are the true Israel, who with his heart glimpsed God; of a generation once freed from the darkness of Egypt; by the enemy transgression being plunged beneath the health giving waters; set ablaze with the faith following the fire 83 in the desert. The once bitter, through the wood of the cross you now experience as sweet. You draw forth from Christ the waters springing into eternal life. You feed the inner man with celestial bread. In the gospel you receive in thunder the divine voice;104 Whereby when you will have persevered with Israel in the wilderness, you will enter the promised land with Jesus. Farewell in Christ Jesus our Lord.